---
templateKey: blog-post
title: JSConf 2018 Recap
date: 2018-09-04 20:20 UTC
author: "Robert DeLuca"
tags: 
  - conferences
  - jsconf
  - recap
description: "JSConfUS is back after a three-year hiatus and Robert
had the chance to attend. He covers his favorite talks he saw while there!"
image: /blog/2018/09/04/jsconf-2018-recap/js-conf-recap.jpg
---

JSConfUS has officially made a come back after [a three-year
hiatus.](http://lastcall.jsconf.us/about.html) I’d like to take this
moment to thank [Chris](https://twitter.com/voodootikigod) & [Laura
Williams](https://twitter.com/lwilliams) for all of the work that they
put into building such an awesome & welcoming community. I’d also like
to [thank the new organizers](https://2018.jsconf.us/team/) that
brought JSConfUS back! This year was exceptional, as you’d expect from
a JSConf!

I had the pleasure to attend JSConf 2015 along with this most recent
JSConf. This year JSConfUS was held in sunny San Diego. I prefer the
resort in FL simply because there was direct beach access. Let’s be
honest, that’s a total nitpick. 😆

One of the new twists to JSConf this year was the addition of a first
come, first speak format. This allowed anyone to sign up and give a
talk in Track B, [which is exactly what I
did!](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/robert-deluca/) I wasn’t
selected to be apart of the main track but that didn’t stop me from
giving my talk on [BigTest.](https://bigtestjs.io)  I _love_ this idea
so much. There were a ton of interesting talks that came from Track B
& it allowed some to speak for the first time.

## My favorite seven talks

It would take me forever to recap each talk, so I’m going to narrow
the field down to my favorite seven. Turns out when all the talks are
good it makes it really hard to pick your favorite seven, but I’ll try
anyway!

### I See: Overcoming Challenges In Software Development
[By Kevin O’Neil](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/kevin-oneil/)

In this talk, Kevin covers all of the challenges he’s overcame to be a
front-end developer with a visual impairment. He covered a range of
challenges like finding a job in a city that had good public transit
since most jobs required him to be in office when he can’t drive. This
is ultimately why Kevin, a San Diego native, ended up in Tokyo!

He also covered the challenges he faces when trying to do pixel
perfect front-end development and the different browser extensions &
tools he uses to get the job done, which I found fascinating. Tools
like [Atoms Telatype](https://teletype.atom.io/) allowed him to pair
with his coworkers without having to adjust a ton of settings.

I had the pleasure of sitting at the same table with Kevin before and
after his talk. Once he was finished with his talk, one of the coolest
things happened. A PM from the Firefox dev tools team came over and
asked if there was anything they could do with their dev tools to help
improve Kevin’s development experience. Which got me thinking… We put
effort into making the experiences we’re building accessible but
rarely give thought to accessible developer experiences.

### ES6 In Practice
[By Tim Doherty](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/tim-doherty/)

I wasn’t sure what to expect when I sat down to watch this talk. My
initial reaction was “I’ve been writing ES6 since 2015, what could I
take away from this?”. I’m happy I did attend and didn’t judge purely
from the title. Tim had a pretty awesome presenting style that I
enjoyed. It kept me engaged and entertained as we took a tour through
where ES6 came from, what actually made it into ES6, and what followed
in ES2016-18.

This is a great refresher talk for anyone that has been using ES6 for
a while as well as a great intro talk for those who are still looking
to dip their toes into the new language features.

### Please Don’t Mock Me
[By Justin Searls](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/justin-searls/)

I had the chance to see this talk earlier in the year at [Assert
js](https://www.assertjs.com/schedule/), which blew me away. Justin is
an excellent conference speaker with a ton of experience. This talk
had something like 725 slides! I thought I had a ton at 250. This talk
was slightly different from the one he gave at Assert. The main
differences I can pick out are tweaked examples and a little more fine
tuning on the message.

This talk was pretty damn awesome & a ton of information was thrown
out there at a rapid pace. The main takeaway is: mocking in unit tests
is supposed to help shape the design of your program rather than
punching holes, in reality, to make it easier for you to test. It
helps you figure out when and where the right time to mock in your
unit tests.

This might have been the best talk from JSConf, but it’s so hard to
declare that with all of the other amazing content. Lastly, I’m super
impressed with the closed captioning service at JSConf. They were able
to keep up with Justin and nailed it.

### Adventures In Ethical Computing
[By Myles Borins](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/myles-borins/)

This talk by Myles wasn’t technical but it was by far the most
thought-provoking one I saw. He covered different ways bias works its
way into the programs we write — whether we like it or not. We work
our own biases in when we create. It’s up to you to recognize your
bias and actively challenge them.

Myles gave a couple of solid examples to demonstrate these biases. My
main takeaway from this talk is to always keep looking at and digging
into the data you have. Is it fully formed? Where is the inherent bias
in it? What can you do to challenge that and create a better data
model?

This is one that you’ll want to watch once the video drops. 🔥

### Exploring WebUSB And Its Exciting Potential
[By Suz Hinton](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/suz-hinton/)

As a part-time IOT nerd who is always looking for ways to automate my
house, this talk from Suz was a lot of fun and super informative. Also
big kudos to her for coming straight off a vacation and filling a
speaker role that opened up in a weeks time. 👏🏼

Suz covered how the browser _used_ to interact with physical devices
connected via USB, what changed, and what’s coming down the pike. She
had a live demo on stage, which is gutsy! But totally worth it because
it was neat to see a full end-to-end demo. She plugged in an Arduino,
allowed the browser to connect to the device,  drew a message in the
browser, and then sent it to the Arduino.

If you have any interest in IOT & controlling those devices visa USB
through the browser, this talk is for you!

### A Quest To Be A (Web)Master: How Do You Go From Simple Code To Building Great Web Experience?
[By Mariko Kosaka](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/mariko-kosaka/)

The best way I can sum up this amazing talk from Mariko is it covers
all of the things Google engineers have been yelling at me for. But
she did it in an awesomely informative way. I learned so much about
how the browser works.

Her slides and diagrams explaining how the browser offloads different
process to the GPU or other threads were SUPER helpful. If you’re
struggling with getting silky smooth 60fps animations without page
jank, I highly recommend checking this talk out. It made a murky
picture pretty clear for me!

### Discovering The True Identity Of @Horse_JS Using Machine Learning
[By Burke Holland and Jasmine Greenway](https://2018.jsconf.us/speakers/burke-holland-and-jasmine-greenway/)

This was probably the most fun talk at JSConf and they saved it for
last! Burke & Jasmine detailed their experience trying to parse
`@horse_js`’s tweets to figure out who `@horse_js` really is.

Turns out they weren’t really able to use machine learning too much to
help them with this, but they did learn a lot about different data
crunching techniques. There were a lot of hilarious jokes & puns
sprinkled throughout the talk, which made it great to end the conf
on.

They ended up narrowing horse down to 4 different possible people (who
were never exposed, for good reasons!). One in ATX and three in
NYC. Am I horse JS? 🤔 They never said who it was… the mystery will
never be solved!

## Conclusion

JSConfUS 2018 was amazing as all other JSConfs usually are. The new
organizers did a great job making sure everyone felt welcomed and were
super responsive to any questions I had. It was one of those
conferences where the organization was done so well it fell away and
was out of sight.

I tried my best to narrow my favorite talks down, but let’s be honest,
all of the talks were amazing. If you have spare time when the videos
come out I recommend watching all of them. They were diverse and full
of super interesting information!

I can’t wait for JSConfUS 2019! My checkbook is waiting…
